---
layout: text
sidebar: left
title: 'The Queen of France | Die Königin von Frankreich'
engtitle: 'The Queen of France'
origtitle: 'Die Königin von Frankreich'
breadcrumb: true
permalink: "text/queen-france"
identifier: queen-france
textauthor: von Schondoch
languages: [German, Western Europe]
periods: [15th Century]
genres: [Narrative Verse]
textcollections: "Gender Sex and Sensuality: Writings on Women Men and Desire"
sdr: https://library.stanford.edu/research/stanford-digital-repository 
doi: example-doi 
image: /assets/img/text/queen-france.jpg
imagesource: Heidelberg Hs. 1012 (olim Ashburnham Place, Cod. 486) ff. 249r [Public Domain]'
fulltext: '  u/v- spelling and i/j- spelling follow the manuscript, e.g. Heid. Hs. 1012 vnd > Standard Middle High German und; Heid. Hs. 1012 ouer > Standard Middle High German ober; Heid. Hs. 1012 dye > Standard Middle High German diu/die; Heid. Hs. 1012 lijff > Standard Middle High German lîp. Separate and compound spelling are not normalized to standard Middle High German but rather follow the manuscript and no punctuation has been added (no periods, question marks, or exclamation points; no commas, semicolons, or colons; no dashes, or hyphens; no brackets, braces, or parentheses; and no apostrophes or quotation marks). Scribal corrections, deletions and additions, mostly indicated by the rubricator with red ink, are recorded. Crossed out letters and words in the manuscript are crossed out in the edition as well. For the sake of the edition’s readability and following standard practice abbreviations and diacritical signs are expanded, and the descending s (ſ), which appears internally and initially but not at the end of words, is replaced with the round s. The rubricator’s red-ink flourishes have been disregarded after carefully analyzing their semiotic meaning. The flourishes are only used when there is an empty space on a line between the rhyme word, which is always placed at the end of a line, and the line delineating the end of the column. Which suggests that these flourishes are only decorative because they ensure that the manuscript looks uniform. The scribe at times ran out of room while writing and completed a line in an adjacent empty space. In some of these cases, the rubricator drew a red-ink line indicating where the final phrase belonged. These final phrases were added and marked by double slashes. This edition also follows the rubricator’s red-ink line indication in the manuscript, which at times deviates from the scribe’s lines. In only three places, where Heid. Hs. 1012 appears to be flawed, it is amended in a clearly referenced manner. Additions in comparison to Strippel’s edition are marked by italics. Letters and words crossed out in Heid. Hs. 1012 are marked with a strikethrough and the final phrase of a line written in an adjacent empty space in Heid. Hs. 1012 is marked with double slash marks. Des konings boich von franckrich geit hijr ain The story of the King of France is being told here DYe schrijfft bedudet so waz geschach This text tells what happened Daz man yn hoger eren sach when a fine king of France Von franckrich eynnen koninck guet rose to high esteem. Der waz vor wandel wail behuit He was flawless. Der selbe herre hat grois huiß ere The household honor of this very lord was great. Er hat eyn mynnencliches wijff He had a lovely wife. Naich wvnschen waz gestalt ir lijff She was so beautiful, Zuchtich vnde bescheyden virtuous, and modest Daz sij nyeman mochte verleyden that no one could despise her; Wer sij myt augen ain gesach whoever had seen her with his own eyes, Dat er yr jn hoger eren jachStrippel’s edition includes the following line: “Der künig hette ein marschalg” (p. 213, l.13). This line from Strippel is included in the translation because of the rhyme scheme and the subsequent text talk about an unknown “er”; it looks like the scribe made a mistake and forgot to copy this line. held her in the highest esteem. [Now the king had a marshal.]Line 11a was taken from Strippel because the rhyme scheme and the subsequent text talk about an unknown “er”; it looks like the scribe made a mistake and forgot to copy this line (p. 213, l.13). Den moyst man forten ouer all Everyone had to fear him everywhere, Alles daz er geboyt And everything that he ordered Da von die koningynnen qwam // yn noit Because of him, the queen faced great hardship Want dye koningynnen because he begged her Dye bat er vmb dye mynne for her love, Want hey ir dick heymlichen waz as he often met with her in private. Myt eren sij doch vor yeme genaß She overcame him with her honor, Daz sij durch falsche bede for such a treacherous plea Nye ouell dayt gedede would never make her commit such an evil deed, Want sij versagede yeme dogen // clich and she refused him as she should. Zu yeme so sprach dye mynnenclich The lovely lady said to him: War vmb mudes du myr dez “How can you imagine such a thing of me? Du weyß doch woil wez durch // weß You know full well Willen du daz laissen salt on whose account you must desist: Myn herre der ist dijr also holt on account of my lord, who holds you in such high esteem. Er hat gesat yn dyne hant He has placed in your hands Burge stede vnde wijde lant castles, cities, and wide lands, Durch daz du syn geweldich bist and put you in charge of them. Durch got layß mich ain argelist For the sake of Our Lord, spare me your malicious tricks Belyuen vnd bede mich nit me and do not ask me again Daz myr gee ain myne ere for anything that compromises my honor.” DEr marschalck vngetruwe sprach The faithless marshal said: Myr ist vmmer nuwee “The torment and suffering of my heart Vngemach vnd hertzen leyt are renewed daily.The syntax has been changed in the English translation for clarity of meaning. Auch hain ich ain vnderscheit What’s more, I have loved you ceaselessly Gedynet von kindez yogent since I was young. Nu laissent mich uwer dogen Now let me enjoy a secret affair with you Geneyssen vnd horent mich and grant me my pleas, Vill zarte frauwe mynnenclich dearest, beloved lady.” Do sprach die zarte mynnenclich The lovely and sweet one replied: Jch nemen is uff die true myn “On my honor, I swear, Erlaysse mich deser bede spare me this request Ee dan daz ich dich erwede or I promise Brenghe jn leyt vnd vngemach to inflict on you pain and trouble.” Der marschalg gedohte The marshal thought: O avee und owach“sprach” at the end of line 46 was substituted by “gedohte” taken from Strippel because the subsequent text makes clear that the marshal would never talk about his evil thoughts before taking leave of the queen (p. 220, l. 48); she is ignorant of his evil intentions. “Oh, woe is me! Alas! Leget sij is mynem herren vor If she passes this on to my lord, So weyß ich wail daz ich verlore I know for certain that I will lose Lijff ere vnde alle myn guet my life, my honorable position at court, and all my possessions.” Da myt der marschalk von ir schiet With this the marshal took leave of her, Vnde ginck gedencken euen and he left thinking about Wie er dye fraue brecht vmb ir // leuen how to take the lady’s life. Der koningk eyns seden plach The king was in the habit of Wanne er schinen sach den // dach getting up in a noble manner, So stunt er uff von hoger art at daybreak, Dar lijße von der frauen zart and leaving the sweet lady Vff daz er sij slayffen lyeß sleeping there, Als yn syne dogent daz hyeß as his good manners demanded of him, Want sij waz der iare nyt alt for she was young. So fore er iagen jn den walt He went hunting in the woods, Bijssen vnde beyssen with hunting dogs and with falcons. Der koningk hat auch geheissen The king had also ordered Daz man besluysse keyn durre that no door be locked Want der marschalk were dar vor because the marshal oversaw that. Also wail getruwet er dem bosewicht That is how much he trusted the villain; Er enwist von syner falscheit nyt he knew nothing of his treachery. Der koningk auch erzogen hat The king had also raised Eyn getwerg ane al missedait a blameless dwarf, Es lach vnde slyeff jn dem saille who rested and slept in the great hall. Dez nam der feyge marschalk war The cowardly marshal took him, Vnde laicht is der frauen jn die arm put him into the lady’s arms, Vnde decket es sere warm covered him up Vnde kerde es zu yrrer bruste and turned him to her breast, Daz sij is werlich nyt enwiste and she did not notice what was happening. Vnde macht er sich dannen balde Then he quickly departed Zu deme selbn walde for the woods, Jn snellicher lijst full speed, Da er synen herren wiste where he knew his lord was hunting. Do er den koning ain sach As soon as he spied the king, Vsser faltschem munde er sprach he spoke deceitful words: Layssent uwer jagen hi belyuen “Stop your hunting right now. Jr sullent anders bedryuen You should chase something else, Daz uch nu me zu hertzen gait that lies closer to your heart Vnde kummerlichen mach werden rait and that can only with great difficulty be turned from wrong to right.” Der koning sprach waz mach dat // syn The king said: “What might that be?” Der marschalk sprach de koningynne The marshal replied: “The queen, Sij pleget falscher mynne she is an adulteress, Jr sullent nu werden jnne and you have to see it for yourself. Koment mit mir drade Come with me quickly, Jr fyndent sij ain faltscher dade you will catch her in the act of infidelity.” Der koning sere erschrackt The king was very shocked Jagen er nit langer enplach and he stopped the hunt. Jn zorne fore er weder heym Furious, he rode home. Er fant die zarte wandels kein He found the dearest one as before, Dan noch slayffen ain dem bette still sleeping in her bed, Vnde sach wo sij hatte and saw that she had by her side Daz getwerch ain alle schult the blameless dwarf. Daz nam er mit vngedolt He lifted the dwarf up swiftly and angrily Alda myt synen henden with his hands Vnde sluyche is weder dye wende and slammed him against the wall– Vmb schult da id nye vmb warff All for a crime that the dwarf never committed– Byß id von synen henden starff until the king had killed the dwarf. Dye frauwe erwacht vnd sprach The lady awoke and asked: Here waz ist uwer vngemach “Sire, what troubles you, Daz yr sijt zornes also voll that you are so full of anger?” Er sprach du bose schande He replied: “You worthless disgrace, Du weist doch waill you know why! Sych wye schenlich du hij lijgest Look at how shamefully you lie here Vnde mich mit falscheit ouergist and how you drown me in deceit Myt dyner faltscher mynne with your adultery!” Herre behaldent uwer synne “Sire, be reasonable,” Sprach dye edel fraue zart said the noble and tender lady, Got weyß woil daz ich nye schuldich enwart “God knows, I am not guilty Ayn dyessen lesterlichen sachen of such immoral actions. So wye es sich auch hait gemacht Whatever might have happened, Daz muß uch got geuen zu erkennen God will unveil the truth to you Vnd mich von dießer vnschult nemen“vnschult” was translated as “schult” because the queen is talking about how God will prove that she is innocent not guilty; “vnschult” seems to be a scribal error. and take me from this blame.” Er sprach swich vnd rede nyt He replied: “Silence! Do not speak! Ich hain ain dyeßer geschiecht I find this matter Also lesterlichen funden so degrading Daz du zu dyesen stunden that you have at this hour Daz leuen moys verloren hain lost your life, Als balde ich es gefugen kan as soon as I can bring it about!” Do fugede es got daz da bij lach Now as God designed, there lived nearby Eyn furste der hies hertzoch lupolt a prince, named Duke Leopold. Als es got fugen wulde As God had intended, Der erhorte daz gebroche he heard of the crime. Vnd er waz von dez konings geslecht He belonged to the royal family, Er waz dez koningx suster kint he was the king’s sister’s child, Als men noch beschreben fynt as it is written in the books, Er waz von oysterich genant and he was from Austria. Er lyeff da er den fursten fant He hurried to the lord. Er sprach herre was zornent ir He asked: “Sire, why are you so angry? durch got daz sult yr sagen mir.“durch got” at the end of line 134 drifted onto the wrong line. Staying true to the rhyme and for clarity of meaning “durch got” was moved to the beginning of line 135. In God’s name, tell me.” Do sprach der edel koning rijch There the noble and highborn king replied: O neue layß erbarmen dich “Oh nephew, take pity on me! Myn hertzeleyt is also groiß My heart’s suffering is very great. Sijch wie dye schande ain eren blois Just look at how this disgrace So lesterlichen geworffen hait has so degradingly attacked my honor Daz ir nummer mach werden rait that it can never be made right again.” Do sprach der hirtzoch lu // polt Then Duke Leopold said: So werdent mir nummer holt “Even though you may never grant me your favor again: Myn fraue nye kein schult gewan my lady is blameless. Yemant mach sij verraden hain Someone must have betrayed her; Want ich nye faltscheit an ir sach I have never seen deceit in her.” Der koning myt zorne sprach The king replied with anger: Sij moyß verbyrnen uff eyner hort “Let her be burned at the stake!” Neyn sprach der herre erent die frucht “No”, said the Duke, “honor the child Dye sij yn yrrem lijff dreyt she carries in her womb. Dodent ir sij es wirt uch leyt If you kill her it will cause you grief Want ir anders kein erben hait because you have no other heir. Burge stede vnde wijde lant Castles, cities, and wide lands Dye yr billich sullont erffen which you will pass on by right, Willent yr sij verderffen do you want to ruin all that? Neyn werder herre dont so wail No, noble Sire, act in such a way Daz ich uch vmmer danck sal that I will be obliged to you forever: Geuent ir frijst laist sij genesen let her live until she gives birth, Vff daz ich uwer dyner moge wesen and I will continue to serve you, Also ich bin gewesten as I have in the past. Nye kein schult wart so grois // nye No guilt is so great Da enwer eyn deill genaden ain that it does not deserve a portion of mercy. Nu layst sij herre genyessen myn Now let her be for my sake, Sire, Vnde ere dy maria die koningynne and honor the Queen Mary, Dye reyne mait die got gebar the pure maiden, who gave birth to God, Vnde nement uwer dogent war and show your virtue Durch ere aller reyner wijff on behalf of the purest woman, Want sij jn yrrem lijff because the queen carries in her body Dreyt eyne swere burde a heavy burden. Jch weyß dat sij nye enwurde I know that she is not Schuldich ain deser dait guilty of this misdeed, So wye es sich gefuget hait however it transpired.” Do sprach der koning zu hant Then the king said quickly: Du weyß wail wie ich sij lijgen fant also lesterlich “You know very well how I found her lying there, so immorally. Eyn deill wil ich doch eren dich Yet I will honor you in part: Nym fure sij von den augen myn Take her, lead her out of my sight Biß sij geberet daz kindelin until she gives birth to the child. So moyß sij doch verlesen den lijff After that she must lose her life, Daz geschanten bose wijff this immoral, wicked wife.” Der hirtzoch von oesterich The Duke of Austria Nam dye fraue mynnenclich took the lovely lady Dem koning von den augen sin out of the king’s sight. Er suechte also wijden hyen He searched near and far Eynen hoichgeborn man for a highborn man Der laster noch schande nye ge // wan who was free from error and vice Der mit gantzer herscher craft and who had with heroic acts Erworffen hat rijtterschafft gained knighthood Gantz mit allen synen synen // worden by being constant in word Stede ain allen orden and deed everywhere. Dem beuall er dye fraue guet Into this man’s protection he gave the honorable lady. Er sprach nu haue sij jn diner hude He told him: “Now protect her Vnde fure sij hyn yn myn lant and escort her into my land. Biß yr got die gnade hait bekant When God is merciful to her Daz sij geberet eyn kindelyn and she bears a child, So saltu nyt langer syn then do not hesitate: Daz kint saltu brengen mir bring the child to me, Dye muder laiß hinder dijr leave the mother behind.” Der rijtter nam die fraue zart The knight took the sweet lady Dye eme da beuolen wart who had been consigned to his care. Er furte sij durch eynen wilden dan He escorted her through a wild evergreen forest. Daz gefrisch der marschalk der bose man The marshal, the wicked man, discovered this. Der wapende sich He armed himself Zu hant alda vnde reyt heymlichen na quickly and rode after them secretly Vnd ermordet den rijtter stolz and murdered the proud knight. Dye fraue floich in daz holz The lady fled into the woods. Er furte den rijtter von dem wege He dragged the knight’s corpse off the path, Vff daz nyeman ensege so that no one would discover Waz mordez da geschege that a murder had been committed In der rechter strayssen stege on the rightful road and path. Wye gerne er ayn der stede Although he wished Dye koningynnen auch ermordt het he had also murdered the queen right there and then, Do hatte sij sych verborgen she had hidden herself. Do reit er heym mit sorgen He rode home worried Do er dye fraue nit enfant because he could not find the lady. Do gedaicht er alle zu hant He quickly decided that, Ayff sij erweder qweme if she returned, Daz er yr den lijff neme he would take her life, Der morder der bosewicht the murderer, the villain. Dye fraue ginge jn leydes plijcht The lady wandered in anguish Jndem walde da sij waz through the woods where she found herself. Wurtzelen lauff vnde graß Roots, leaves and grass, Daz aß sij yn dem walde that is what she ate in the woods, Daz mynnencliche bilde this image of loveliness. Sij ginge also lange jn dem dan She walked for a long time in the evergreen forest, Biß sij zu eynem koler qwam until she came across a collier. Dye mynnencliche geslachte The lovely noblewoman Sij fraget yn waz er machte asked him what he was doing. Er sprach fraue ich birnen kolen He replied: “Milady, I am burning charcoal.” Sij sprach ist dijr da mit wolle She asked: “Does this work suit you?” Js macht dijr swartz dinen lijff “It makes your body all black”, Sprach daz mynnenclijche wijff said the lovely woman. Do sprach der koler sunder haß The collier replied kindly: Wulde got so hette ichs baß “If God had wished it things would have been better for me. Nu moyß ich durch hungers noit Now I am driven by hunger Dys doin biß ain mynen doit to keep doing this until I die.” Do sprach dye zarte koningynne The sweet queen said: Wiltu mich layssen bij dir syn “Will you permit me to stay here with you? Waz du ain fays daz helffen ich dir I will help you with whatever you undertake. Dez saltu geleuben mir You can believe what I say.” Do sprach der vil getrue man The most trustworthy man said: Jch enkan uch leyder nit gedoin “Alas, I cannot do for you Also yr wail wert weren what you are certainly worthy of, Vil frauwe zarte gehere very lovely highborn lady.” Do sprach auer dye koningyn // nen The queen responded: Lyuer frunt nu do so wail “Dear friend, now do a good deed, Dez ich dir vmmer dancken sal for which I will be forever grateful to you. Ich hain bij mir noch funff gulden I still have five gold coins with me. Dye nym jn den budel dyn Put them into your purse Vnde gang jn sneller ylen and go as quickly as you can Dez weges seben milen seven miles down the road Jn dye stat zu parijß into the city of Paris. Vnde gilt mir sijde gruyn gell vnd // wijß Buy silk for me – green, yellow and white, Swartz farbe vnde blae black and blue, Vnde auch von roder farbn and also some red colors. Vnde brenge vns na dyner wijße And bring us, as you see fit, Waz mir bedorffen zu der spyse what we need for food. Ffraget dich vmmant war du wilt If anyone asks you what you are doing, Biß der reden nyt zu milde do not be too generous with your words, Daz du myn nyt gewuges so that you do not mention me Vnde mich jn groissen kummer fuges and put me in great danger.” Der koler dede daz sij hin hies The collier did as he was told by her. Syner truwen er nit enlyeß His honesty permitted no less. Er dede daz jn dye fraue bat He did what the lady asked Vnde ging zu parijß jn die stat and went to Paris, into the city. Er galt yr waz sij wuldeStrippel’s edition includes the following line: “Und was si haben sollte” (p. 257, l. 258). This line from Strippel is included in the translation to stay true to the rhyme. He bought her what she wanted [and needed.]Line 265a was taken from Strippel to stay true to the rhyme (p. 257, l. 258). Er galt ir nalden vnde scheren He bought needles and scissors Der mynnenclichen heren for the lovely noblewoman, Vnde auch spyse dye doechte as well as food that he thought Dye sij essen moechte she would like to eat. Dye zarte ayn alle weder satz Without further ado, the lovely one Machte von sijden richen schatz created precious treasures out of silk, Vnde sante den weder jn die stat which she sent back to the city, Den koler sij es verkeuffen bat where she asked the collier to sell them. Also lyeff er uß vnde jn And so he ran in and out of the city, Biß dye zarte koningynnen until the lovely queen Eynen schonen son gebar gave birth to a handsome son. Dye zarte frauwe verdhalff // jare For three and a half years the sweet lady Jn dem wilden walde waz lived in the wild woods. Biß sij von goitz genaden genaß In the meantime, until the queen had, by the grace of God, been delivered of her child Do lach der ritter dort ermordt The murdered knight lay there, Vill verre jn dem walde doit faraway, dead in the woods, Verholen jn dem wilden danne hidden in the wild evergreen forest. Erzoichen hatte der werde man Now this noble man had personally raised Gar lijfflich eynen schonen hunt a beautiful dog. Der lecket yn da er waz wont This dog licked the body’s wounds Biß yn der hunger dannen dreiff until hunger drove it away. Langer er da nyt enbeleyff Not able to stay any longer, Er lyeff weder zu hoyffe it ran back to court Da manich apt vnd busschoff where many abbots and bishops Vnde hoge fursten sayssen and great princes were gathered, Vnde druncken vnde ayssen drinking and feasting. Der hunt gingk in den sall The dog went into the great hall Vnde sach den feygen marschalk // wail and saw the cowardly marshal walking Vor der taeffelen hyn vnde her to and fro in front of the tables. Der hunt vmb fing hin freischlich The dog attacked him viciously, Jn dye fueß vnd die beyn biting his feet and legs. Der hont zandert freislich vnd // greyn The dog bit and barked furiously, Biß der vngetruwe man until the treacherous man Den syn jn sych gewan came to his senses Vnde daichte ain dye oueldait and remembered the crime Dye er mit dem rijtter begangen hat that he had committed against the knight. Der hont forte do den doit Now fearing death, Zu hant greiff er eyn broit the dog quickly snatched a loaf of bread Vnde floich dannen balde and fled away Da hyn zu dem walde back to the forest immediately, Da syn herre ermordet lach where its master lay murdered. Dat hirde er naicht vnd dach It guarded the corpse, night and day. Dit dreiff er so manich maille It repeated these actions over and over, Er dede dem marschalk groisse quale inflicting great pain on the marshal, Er beyß yeme manche wunde dieff giving him many deep bite wounds Vnde dan weder zum walde lyeff before running back to the forest. Her uff warde der von oesterich The Duke of Austria observed this. Yeme doichte harde wunderlich He wondered greatly Daz der hont beyß den eynen why the dog attacked only one man Vnde suß anders neren keynen and ignored everyone else. Alß nu der hunt auer quam So once, when the dog returned, Vnd yn beyß vnd eyn broit nam bit the marshal, snatched a loaf of bread, Do wart yeme zu flyen ja and was about to flee again, Der hirtzoch reyt yeme allet na the duke followed it back. Do furt yn der hunt gerecht The dog led him truly Ayn dye wilde geschiecht to the place where the crime had occurred, Da syn herre ermordet lach and where its master lay murdered. Der herre von oesterich sere ersch // rack The lord of Austria was stunned. Er bekant yn wail vur daz He recognized immediately Daz er syn getruwee diner waz that this was his loyal follower. Yeme lyeffen ouer syne augen His tears flowed freely. Diß begunde der hunt schauen The dog began to notice this Vnde ergoyß vil der heysser treen and shed many bitter tears. Jch gedencken vnde wenen „I think and believe”, Sprach der hirtzoch sicherlich said the Duke with certainty, Nu sal es erfinden sych “that now it will be shown, Ain deme vngetruwen man oh you treacherous man, Du hais dimen herren vntrue gedain that you betrayed your lord.” Da mit reyt er von dannen With this he rode away Jn eyn dorff als yeme woil gezam to a village, as was fitting, Vnd geschuff dem rijtter zart and arranged that the chivalrous confidant Daz er heymlich begrauen wart be secretly buried. Vnde reyt do heym gerecht He rode directly back to court“heym” was translated as “hof” because the Duke’s home is Austria and he is riding back to the king’s court, not Austria. Vnde saget do von nymman nicht and told no one of all this. Er sprach nu wil ich woil syen He said: “Now, let’s see Waz von dem hunde sal geschien what happens with the dog.” Der marschalk eyns morgens froe Early one morning the marshal commanded Daz man slusse die porte zu that the gates be closed So wanne der hunt qweme so that when the dog came Vnde auer eyn broit neme to snatch a loaf of bread again Daz man yeme ane dede den doit it could be killed. Vill hart man yeme daz geboit His orders were followed ruthlessly. Dar na quam ouer der hunt Then the dog returned Vnde sleich zur seluer stont and sneaked in as before. Durch die lude er do dranck It pushed through the crowd Vnde verbarch sich vnder eyn banck and hid itself under a bench Biß der marschalk saß ouer disch until the marshal was seated above it at the table Man braicht yeme fleisch vnd fisch and was served meat and fish. Der hunt enwaz nit trege The dog was not sluggish. Da er fant syne wege When it had spotted a path, Er sleych vnder deme dische // dar it sneaked along under the table Vnde nam dez feygen marschalk war until it detected the cowardly marshal. Er zoich jn faste vnde beyß bijß It grabbed and bit him hard. Dem marschalk wart so heyß The marshal turned hot and Von grynen vnde zorne screamed so with pain and anger Daz der koning hogeborn That the highborn king Sprach mit luder stymmen spoke loudly, Vnde mit zornes grymme in a terrible and angry voice: Balde dodent mir den hunt “Someone, kill that dog for me at once! Der mir hait gemacht wunt It has injured Den marschalk vor den augen myn the marshal before my eyes. Dez moyß er lijden dez dodes pin For that it must suffer the pain of death!” Der hunt balde dannen ging The dog ran away instantly, Eyn broyt er uff dem f dische fing snatching a loaf of bread Vnde floich als er vur dede and fleeing as usual, Dye porte man beslossen hatte but the gates were closed Vff daz man yn doden sulde so that it could be killed. Der hunt zu hirtzoch lupolt lyeff So the dog ran to Duke Leopold, Want dem jn synem hertzen dieff because the faultless knight Lach der rijtter wandels bloyß lay close to the Duke’s heart.The syntax has been changed in the English translation for clarity of meaning. Dem spranck der hunt jn synen schoiß The dog leapt into his lap. Der koning bij yeme sas The king sat beside him, Der syner muder bruder waz Duke Leopold’s mother’s brother. Do sprach der hirtzoch dogentlich The virtuous Duke said: O lyuer herre erhorent mich “Oh, dear Sire, hear me now! Jch beden fruntlich vor desen hunt I speak as an advocate for this dog. Erleubet mir zu deser stunt Give me permission now Daz ich hude syne wart do to plead the dog’s case today Vnde uwer genade keret dar zu and see that justice is done.” Also lyefflich er yn bat He asked him so agreeably: Von dem dysche er do trat he stepped in front of the king’s table Vnde viell dem koning zu fuyß and knelt there at his feet. Er sprach ich dich eren muyß The king said: “I must respect you, Wye wail es ist wunderlich even though this case is truly strange.” Do sprach der herre von oysterich Then the lord of Austria replied: Nu horent ir lyeben herren zu “Now listen, dear Sire, Aiff got nu eyn wunder doyt to the marvel that God is displaying here. Jn kamps wisen steyt nu der hont This dog stands ready to fight a trial by combat. Er duet uch vnd den fursten kunt It is showing you and the princes Dat eme syn herre ermordet ist that its master has been murdered. Er byedet uch ain argelist It is presenting its claim to you, free of falsity, Daz yr yeme helffent stempen that you second its motion to fight. Er wilt den morder kempen The dog wants to fight a trial by combat with the murderer, Der schuldich ist ain dieser dait who is guilty of this deed. Der marschalk synen herren ermordt // hait The marshal murdered its master, Den rijtter der hie von uch foir the knight, who rode away from here from you Vnd uch jn gantzen truwen swoir after pledging complete allegiance to you, Vnde vren notz vnd ere and the marshal betrayed your fealty and honor. Nu hauent der fursten lere Now uphold royal protocol Wie man gestedige eynen kamp for carrying out such a trial by combat.” Der marschalk sich jn sorgen ramp Tormented by fear, the marshal Vnd sprach zu dem von oysterich replied to the Austrian duke: War vmb erschemet ir mich “Why do you shame me? Ich hain uch leydes nit getain I have never done you any wrong, Wez wilt ir mich genießen lain for which I would deserve this. Dez mordes ir mich zijgent hije You are accusing me of murder, Dez enwart ich schuldich nye of which I have never been guilty.” Der hirtzoch begunde zu sagen The Duke started saying: Herre enlaist uch nyt bedragen “Sire, if you are a just judge, Ayff ir eyn rechter richter sijt do not let yourself be deceived.The syntax has been changed in the English translation for clarity of meaning. So rijchtet schiere dez ist zijt Dispense justice now, it is time. Dye fursten wissent alle waill The princes all know well Wie man mit hunden kempen sall how to fight a trial by combat with dogs.” Der koning eyn alden rijtter ain sach The king spied an old knight Durch recht gerich er zu yme // sprach and as a just judge he said to him: Sage ain so wie du dich verstais “So that I can fulfill my legal duty Want du so vill gesehen hais tell me how you believe this should be done, Daz ich myn recht er fulleStrippel’s edition includes the following line: “Wie man hie kempfen sülle” (p. 282, l. 380). This line from Strippel is included in the translation to stay true to the rhyme. because you have seen so much,The syntax has been changed in the English translation for clarity of meaning. [and how the trial by combat should take place here,] Daz nyemant geschie keyn gewalt so that it is a fair fight. Du bist der jare wail so alt You are so old Wanttu gesehen hais so vill that you have seen a lot. Jd enwirt nit der kinder spill It will not be child’s play. Hye sullent kempen hunde vnd lude Here dogs and humans will fight a trial by combat, Js gilt hyn hals vnde hude risking their necks.” Der rijtter sprach ich weis wail The knight said: “I know very well Wye man mit hunden kempen sal how to fight a trial by combat with dogs. Auer sprichet yemant baß But if someone else knows better, Dem sullent ir folgen ane haß you should follow him. Man sal eynnen bengel nemen A cudgel should be selected Den sal men dem marschalk geuen and given to the marshal, Armen dick vnd elen lanck as thick and as long as an arm. Daz ist myn rait vnd myn gedanck That is my advice and my sentiment. Keyn ander gewere er nit endarff He is not allowed any other defense – Von keynerley wapen scharff no sharp weapon of any kind – Jntgain dem selben hunde against this dog. Dye zende jn syme munde The teeth in its mouth, Da mit der hunt sich weren sal with these the dog shall defend itself Vnde er sich wail behelffen sal and protect itself well.” Do fraget man vmb die slecht vnd auch die crumme All were asked if this was just or unjust. Do dochte man rijtter vnd knecht Everyone, both knights and followers, Daz ordel sin slecht vnd recht found the decision to be just and reasonable. Dat ordel wart do gesacht Then the decision was announced, Vnde eyn kreyß gemacht and a circle was set up Alzu der selber zijt all at the same time. Der marschalk jn groisser nijt With great hostility the marshal Jn den creitz er do tratt stepped into the circle. Der hirtzoch die lude batt The Duke asked the people, Armen vnde rijchen ain alle spot rich and poor, earnestly, Daz sij yeme hulffen beden got to support him in imploring God Daz er dem hunde hulffe dede to help the dog, Dar na daz er hette recht if it was in the right. Do wart gekempt so faste Then the most ferocious trial by combat began: Eyn icklicher hat ouerlaste each had the upper hand Von dem anderen genuych over the other one in turns. Der morder uff den hunt sluch The murderer struck the dog Daz er zu der erden boych so that it fell to the ground. Syn crafft den hont nit bedrouh His strength did not frighten the dog. Er spranck mit eyn sprung snel Swiftly it leapt Dem morder ain dye kell for the murderer’s throat Den munt er zu samen slo sloyß and closed its mouth, Myt bijssen gaff er yeme manchen // stoiß biting him again and again, Daz yeme dat bloit uff die fueß viel so that blood gushed onto his feet. Der morder uff die erde viell The murderer fell to the ground. Jme wart von noden also heyß Agony seared him. Der hunt eme syn kelle zu beiß The dog was tearing at his throat. Er wurgede eme gorgel vnd granß It choked his throat Recht als er wer gewest eyn ganß just as if he were a goose, Biß der morder mit groisser noit until the murderer, in great torment, Dye hende zu dem hemel boit raised his hands heavenwards Vnde dede kunt den fursten daz and announced to the lords Daz er dez dodes schuldich waz that he was guilty of the murder. Do daz der koning horde When the king heard this Do hieß er daz man storde he ordered that the dog be pulled away Von dem morder den hunt from the murderer. Der koning zu der seluer stont The king then Ffraget den k morder wez meren asked the murderer to report Aiff er dez mordez schul were if he was guilty of the murder Dar vmb er gekempet hette da for which he had fought the trial by combat. Do sprach der morder leyder ja The murderer replied: “Alas, yes.” Sage feyge bosewicht “Tell me, you cowardly villain, Waz ist dins mordes geschicht what is the story of this murder, Daz du uff dir weist of which you have convicted yourself, Vnde mir so lange vor geist and which you have kept secret from me for so long?” Do sprach der morder segeloiß The defeated murderer replied: myn kummer der ist also grois “My anguish is so great Jch forten ich moge geneßen nit and I fear I cannot survive. Dar vmb uch myn hertz vergyet That is why my heart now confesses to you Waz ich boißheit hain gedain the evil I have committed: Den rijtter ich ermordet hain I murdered the knight, Der myt uwer frauen foyr who escorted your lady away Vnde uch jn gantzen truen swoir and who pledged complete allegiance to you, uwer notz vnde ere and I betrayed your fealty and honor. Nu horet ir fursten here Now listen, high lord. Dye koningynnen die bat ich vmb // de myne I begged the queen for her love. Vmb daz sij mir versaget Because she refused me Do schoyff ich ir grois hertzenleit I caused her great suffering and heartache. Daz getwerg ich slayffen droich I carried the sleeping dwarf Zu der edeler frauen clug to the noble, beautiful lady. Jch laycht es yr ain die brust I laid it close to her breast, Daz sij werlich nit enwist so carefully that she did not notice what was happening, Daz munt ain munt rurte mouth touching mouth. Myt falscheyt ich uch dar furte I deceitfully led you there, Daz sij gedodet werden solde so that she would be killed, Want sij myner nit enwulde because she did not want me.” Der koning schre owee owach The king screamed: “Oh, woe is me! Alas! Hertzenleyt vnd vngemach Heartache and torment Dat ich nu muß vmmer rijden will ride me Nu vnde zu allen zijden now and forever, Dat ich der reynen frauen zart because I showed the pure sweet lady Ye so vngenedich wart no mercy.” Von jamer er sich selber sluych Out of grief he beat himself. Mit trenen er syn hende twoch His hands were washed Dye yeme da ouergussen by overflowing tears. Syn augen yeme flussen He wept greatly. Er rauffte sich sere vnde faste He tore his hair out violently and vigorously. Er sprach wo bistu edeler gast He said: “Where are you, noble lost one? Eyn reyne frucht eyn zart // lijff Flawless character, lovely body, Du vill hogeboren // wijff highborn lady, En sal ich dich nit na myner gelust shall I never again when I desire it Dich nummer gedruck ain myn // brust press you to my bosom? O herre got so muden ich dir Oh, mighty God, I beg you, Daz du den doit sendes mir send me death Vmb diese groisse missedait because of the great crime Dye myn lijff begangen hait I have committed!” Der koning sprach sage bosewigt The king said: “Tell me, villain, Vnd en hele mir nummer nit and do not hide it from me, War myn frauwe beqweme what happened to my lady Do du den rijtter nemes after you took Den lijff sunder schulde the blameless knight’s life?” Er sprach herre uwer hulde He replied: “Sire, I am beyond the reach Dye is mir gar vnwege of your favor.The syntax has been changed in the English translation for clarity of meaning. Myn frauwe enwas nit drege My lady was not slow. Do ich dem rijtter nam den lijff When I took the knight’s life, Do floich daz mynnencliche wijff the lovely woman fled Also verre jn den dann so far into the evergreen forest Jch enwist nit war sij quam that I do not know what happened to her.” Der koninck den hencker hies The king ordered the executioner Daz er yeme all syn gleder zu sties to break all of his limbs, Want er is woil verdyenet hat which he well deserved. Er heys reyden eyn guit ratt He ordered the preparation of a solid execution wheel. Dar uff sat man den morder The murderer was put on it. Er nam eyn ende bitter He came to a miserable end. Viell schiere boden wart gesant Messengers were sent straight away, Boden uß jn alle lant throughout the country, Abe man id vermen verneme to discover if anyone knew So war dye frauwe komen wer what had happened to the lady. Man suecht sij hyn vnde her They looked for her everywhere, Von yr enhort men keyne mere but there was no news of her. Dyß verzoich sich verdhalf jare The search continued for three and a half years, Bis die schone fraue clare until the pure and beautiful lady Sant kauffmanschaff jn die stat sent goods to the city Dye sij selber hatte gemacht that she had made herself. Na yr so groiße jamer waz There was so much grief on her behalf. Jn der statt eyn frauwe saß Now in the city there lived a lady, Dye yrrem boden sijde gaff who gave silk to her broker, Da er sij zu keuffen plach who was accustomed to buying and selling it. Sijde wolde der boden keuffen The broker wanted to sell her some silk. Dye kremers sprach ich muß lauffen The tradeswoman said: “I have to run. Beyde myn eyn cleyne wile Wait a minute for me. Jch komen jn sneller ylen I will come back quickly. Jch gain jn daz neiste huyß I am going next door.” Alsus lyeff die frauwe hin uβ And then the lady, delighted, Ffrolich uff den berch raced up the hill, Want sij erkant woil daz werck because, as a master craftswoman, Dat id machte die koningynne she had recognized the silk embroidery Myt yren zarten henden fyn made by the queen Want sij waß eyn meisteryn with her dainty, delicate hands.The syntax has been changed in the English translation for clarity of meaning. Sy lyeff uff die burg zu hant She ran right to the castle, Da sij den koning fant where she found the king. Sij hijes yr gebn boden broit She demanded messenger bread as a reward. Sij sprach herre nu habent kein noit She said: “Sire, your troubles are over! Jch hoffen myn frauwe wandels frij I believe that my constant lady Von goitz gnaden funden sij has been found by the grace of God.” Der koning waz der meren fro The king was overjoyed by this news. Ain die fraue lyeff er do He ran to the lady, Vnde koste sij ain yrren munt kissed her on her mouth Vnde sprach wo ist myns heiles funt and said: “Where can I find my fortune, Dye mir myn leben hait getroist who has always comforted and believed in me? Hilff herre daz ich werde erloyst Help me, Lord, deliver me Von sorgen vnd von arbeit from the sorrow, hardship, Vnd jamer den myn hertze dreytt and grief that burden my heart. Nu enpynt mich armen man I’m a miserable man; release me Von groissen sorgen die ich hain from these great sorrows that I have.” Do sprach die fraue dogentlich The virtuous lady replied: Nemet von uch den von oysterich “Take the Duke of Austria Vnde kompt mit mir jn den gadem and come with me to the merchant’s booth, Da werdent ir entladen where you will be freed Von groisser sorgen ouerlast from the mighty burden of your great sorrows. Da vindet ir eynen werden gast You will find an honorable stranger there. Ffraget jn er saget uch woil Ask him and he will indeed tell you Wo man myn fraue finden sal where my lady can be found.” Der koning nit lenger enbeyt The king no longer hesitated: Zu dem hertzochen er do reyt he rode to the duke Jn freuden richen synnen and in joyful anticipation Zu der koningynnen they set out for the queen. Do gesach er wo der kauffman // stunt He saw where the merchant was standing, Als noch die kaufflude gerne dont as merchants usually do Dye da kaufmanschaff dryuen when they are conducting trade. Der bode nit langer moicht blyuen The broker wanted to leave. Der koning fragede den selben knecht The king asked this merchant: Sage ain vnd sage recht “Tell me and tell me truly, Wan haistu die penwert braicht from where did you bring these goods?” Der koler sich balde bedaicht The collier bethought himself quickly. Er sprach ich komen uß engellant He replied: “I come from England, Von dannen bin ich her gesant I was sent here from there Vnde bin komen also her and that is how I have come here.” Der koning sprach jn rechter ger The king said, driven by true desire: Dyß werck wircket eyn frau fyn “This embroidery has been made by a highborn lady. Wyse mich balde die meistoryn Show me that master craftswoman immediately! Vnde sagestu nyt die warheit And if you do not tell me the truth, Der doyt dir von mir geschiet I will have you killed.” Der koler quam jn kommer groiß The collier was overcome by anxiety, Myt trenen er sich sere begoyß and he wept greatly. Er sprach myt groissem leyde He spoke with great anguish: Gelouent mir mit urem eyde “Swear to me on your troth Daz yr dem zarten wyfe that the sweet woman Nyt enschaid ain yrren lyff will not be harmed Da mit sij bedrubet sij or caused any grief.” Der hirtzoch stunt na da bij The Duke was standing close by. Er sprach uff die true myn He said: “I pledge on my honor, Dar vur wil ich burge sin that it will be as you say.” Der koler sprach wilt ir schauen The collier said: “If you wish to see Dye mynnencliche frauwee the lovely lady, So koment mit mir jn das holz then come with me into the woods Vnde gesyet die fraue stolz and you will behold the highborn lady. Sij hait sich gar ergeuen She has given herself over completely Jn eyn vil heylich leben to an utterly holy life: Cleyne sint yr dye locke her hair is short, Sij dreyt ain eyn graen rock she wears a gray robe, Myt flijße hait sij vor den gebeden and she prays diligently for the one Der ir zu eynem man wart geben who was given to her as a spouse.” Der koning waz der meren fro This news pleased the king, Daz sij sich hatte gehalden also that she had lived Als eyn regelerynnen as if she were a nun Aldurch dye godes mynne entirely for the love of God. Durch godes willen sij daz duet She is doing this by the will of God, Ayn den si sich gelayssen hait to whom she has entrusted herself. Der koning sprach nu sage mir The king said: “Now tell me, Vff welche zijt quam sij zu dir when did she come to you?” Er sprach daz ist verdhalf jare The collier said: “Three and a half years ago Daz dye zarte frauwe clare the pure and sweet lady Zu mir quam jn den dan came to me in the evergreen forest. Dar na sij balde eyn kint gewan Soon after she gave birth to a child, Daz ist eyn schoner knabe a handsome boy. Mit flijße ich eme gedinet habe I have served him diligently, Broderlich ain allen wanck like a brother, faithfully. Myr wart die zijt nye zu lanck The years went by quickly.” Der koning sich bedaichte The king came to a decision. Er lyeße syn hertz zu raste He allowed his heart to rest, Daz also sere besweret waz which had been so very heavy. Zu hoyffe lyeß er wißen daz He let it be known at court Daz syne frauwe reyne gehere that his pure highborn lady Myt goitz gnaden funden were had been found by the grace of God. Dye welt wart der meren fro The people were overjoyed by this news. Myt dem koning zoich man do They, and the king, Myt mancher ritter schar and a large band of knights, all together Zu dem jungen rijtter fursten gar they rode into the forestwith her dainty, delicate hands.The syntax has been changed in the English translation for clarity of meaning. Do hyn zu dem walde to the young prince. Do sprach der koler balde There the collier said immediately Zu dem koning von hoger art to the king with the greatest respect: Herre laissent uwer gebroche “Sire, desist from all this noise. Myn fraue ist also gemuet My lady’s state of mind is such Wer weder godes willen duet that she is frightened ofwith her dainty, delicate hands.The syntax has been changed in the English translation for clarity of meaning. Den schuwet sij gar sere anyone who acts against God’s will. Herre nu volget myner lere Sire, follow my advice Vnde komet mit mir heymlich dar and come with me quietly. Wirt myn frauwe dez geruchtz // gewar If my lady becomes aware of all this shouting Dan birget sij sich jn der geschicht she will hide herself away in the thickets Daz mir sij kunnen fynden nicht so that we will not be able to find her. Der walt ist grois vnd lanck The forest is deep and wide. Dez sorget alles myn gedanck This weighs upon my mind. Sij fortet anders ir wilt sij doden Otherwise she will fear that you wish to kill her.” Der koning dede waz man jn hieß The king did as he was told Vff daz er funde die getrue // dyet so that he would find this faithful servant, Dye er so lange hat verlorn who had been lost for so long. Der koning hoichgeboren The highborn king Volgede dem gueden manne followed the virtuous man Want syn rait yme woil bequam because his advice was entirely in the king’s interest. Er ging gutlich da hyn stain He followed him there confidently, Biß er bij die hutte quam until he came to the hut. Da wart yeme freude kunt Now he knew joy, Want er fant muder vnd kint for he had found mother and child. Der junge furste lyeff vogel schiessen The young prince was out hunting birds. Daz kint begunde verdryessen The child became annoyed Do is der lude also vil gesach when he saw so many people. Vyll balde is zu der muder sprach He said to his mother straightaway: Sage mir lyue moder myn “Tell me, dear mother, Waz geruchtes mach dit syn what might this shouting be? Waz dunt dye lude hye What are these people doing here?” Dye koningynnen vor die hutte // ging The queen went in front of the hut Vnde sach wo r der konig her zoich and saw the king approaching. Sij nam daz kint vnd floych She picked up the child and fled, Wye gerne sij geflogen were but however much she wanted to escape Doch so waz daz kint so swere the child was too heavy. S Wye gerne sij geflygen wulde She wanted to escape Der koning dede als er sulde but the king acted as he should. Er lyeff yr snellichen na He raced after her. Er sprach erbarmet uch fraue He said: “Milady, take pity Ouer mich armen man on me; I’m a miserable man, Want ich hain uch vnrecht gedain because I have done you such wrong Daz ich biß ain den junxten dag that until Judgement Day Nummer wail gebuyssen mag I will not be able to ever atone for my sins. O zarte wijff ain argelist Oh, sweet lady without guile, Zeune mir dat du edel bist show me how sublime you are Vnde buet mir fruntlich dynen gruiß by greeting me kindly.” Er viell yr neder ain die fueß He fell at her feet Vnde weynde also sere and wept greatly Von der groisser swere out of the great anguish Dye yeme waz wederfaren that had befallen him. Er neych sijch gutlich zu yren armen He bowed down in submission to her. Er sprach ich wil nummer uff stain He said: “I will never get up again, Jch wil vor dyne hulde hain unless I have your favor.” Der jamer da yr hertz ainfing His misery moved her heart. Do koste er sij Den koning sij lijfflich vmb fing She embraced the king lovingly. Do koste er sij vor yren mont He kissed her on the mouth. Er sprach geloifft sij got dusent stont He said: “Praise be God a thousandfold Daz ich dich fraue funden hain that I have found you, milady. Dez wil ich mich d ain die true lain For this I will surrender myself to loyalty.” Er kuste yr augen vnd geleder He kissed her eyes and limbs. Eyn gantz suyn vnd freden There they both made peace Von yn beyden do erginck and reconciled.The syntax has been changed in the English translation for clarity of meaning. Daz lyue kint er vmbfing He embraced the lovely child Vnde sprach zu yeme bermenclichen and said to it pitifully: Hette ich nu gedodet dich “If I had killed you So were myn sele versencket my soul would have been sunk Vnd jn den hellen grunt erdrenckt and drowned in the depths of hell, Myn lyeffe crone myns hertzen bant you my crown of life, seal upon my heart. Daz haistu vor wail bekant You knew this, Du vill hoichgeloyffter got oh mighty God. Du haist mir geholffen usser noit You helped me out of difficulty. Dyne genade lyeß mich nye Your grace has never abandoned me. Jch hain mit freuden funden hye With joy I have found here Dye ich zu troist hat erkoren the one whom I chose as my companion, Vnde daz lyue kint usser and the lovely child, Hoger art geboren born of noble birth Von yrme zarten lyue from her tender body, Dye mir zu eynem wijffe the one who was Waz gegeuen given to me as a wife. Nu willen mir vnß leuen Now we will turn our lives Gantz keren ain hern crist entirely to Lord Christ Want er vnß aller helffer ist for he is the helper of all of us.” Hije myt dese rede eyn ende hait This is the end of this story. Js waz dem koler eyn selige dayt A great good fortune it was for the collier Daz dye frauwe bij jn qwam that the lady came to him. Er wart dar na eyn selich man He became a fortunate man. Der koning eme alle syn armoidt verdreiff The king rid him of all of his poverty. Er gaff eme sloße vnd dorffer He gave him castles and villages Vnde yn jn synen hoff and brought him to court Want er daz kint usβ dauff hoiff where he received the child at his baptism, Dez dye koningynnen bij yeme waz genessen because the queen had delivered the child with him. Sunder allerley weessen Free of all harm, Hat sij sijch gehalden jn dem walde she survived in the forest. Sij waz dach nit sere alt She was not very old. Sije behyelt yre ere She kept her honor Vnd waz dogentlich zu eren and had virtuously honored Dem ouersten koning rijch that Sovereign Mighty King, Der alle ding gelonen mach who can reward anything, Js sij naicht oder dagh whether it is day or night, Jn hemell aiff uff erden on earth or in heaven. Dye rede laissen mir nu gewerlich Let the story now be Vnde dancken gode von hemelrich and thank God in heaven, Dem synt alle ding mogelijch who can do anything. Hije mit hait diß buech eyn ende This is the end of the book. Got vns alle von sunden wende May God protect us all from sin. Amen Amen. '
---
## Introduction to the Source 
<p>Heid. Hs. 1012, the version of <em>The Queen of France</em> that was used for this transcription and translation, was written around or before 1460 in the Moselle Franconian/Rhenish Franconian region (Siegen-Luxembourg/Kassel-Saarbrücken). The Queen of France is the final text of three in that manuscript. It is preceded by The Duke of Brunswick, a German rhymed couplet narrative; and by Loher and Maller, which is a German prose translation by Elisabeth von Nassau-Saarbrücken (or someone at her court) from a chanson de geste, an Old French heroic epic.</p> <p>Heid. Hs. 1012 tells <em>The Queen of France</em> in a manner focused on the queen's steadfastness and virtue. By adding lines and by expanding on specific themes (e.g. a comparison between the queen and the Virgin Mary and the king's explicit joy at discovering that the queen has lived a virtuous and pious life without him), this version emphasizes the "good wife" theme more than other versions, and in some cases suggests parallels with religious stories of martyrs and saints.</p>
## Introduction to the Text 
<p><em>The Queen of France</em> was composed in the late 14th century somewhere in the Alemannic region (what is today Southern Germany or Austria). Two of 24 surviving manuscripts name one “von Schondoch” as the author of The Queen of France. Aside from the name, nothing else is known about this person. <em>The Queen of France</em> is a prototypical melodramatic tale. There are similar texts in the Medieval German tradition, but they are usually shorter. This verse narrative, composed in rhymed couplets, is also unique because of its wide transmission. The large number of textual witnesses and adaptations of the story, among them Elisabeth von Nassau-Saarbrücken’s famous prose novel Sibille (after 1437), suggest that <em>The Queen of France</em> was very popular in late medieval Germany.</p> <p><em>The Queen of France</em> tells the story of a queen, a good and faithful wife, who is banished for alleged adultery by her husband, the king. Falsely accused by the king’s marshal, whose advances she had turned down earlier, the pregnant queen is saved from death by the intercession of the king’s nephew, the Duke of Austria. The queen is escorted away under the protection of a noble knight, who is assassinated by the villainous marshal. The queen, however, manages to elude the murderer, fleeing into the forest where she is sheltered by a virtuous, poor man. The story takes a turn for the better when the virtuous knight’s faithful dog persistently pursues his master’s murderer. The Duke of Austria sees to it that the dog and the marshal engage in a judicial ordeal whose outcome – the dog is victorious – exposes the marshal’s guilt. Ashamed and shocked by his error of judgement, the king bitterly regrets his actions and searches unsuccessfully for the queen for three and a half years. At last, a female merchant’s recognizing the queen’s exquisite needlework leads to the discovery of the queen and her three-year-old son, and the king and queen are reconciled.</p> <p><em>The Queen of France</em> is interesting to modern readers because it is a medieval melodramatic tale that captures the reader’s attention. Medieval honour emerges as a core concept at multiple points throughout the story: as a commodity that can be both acquired and lost, and as a matter of reputation and respect, which was the basis of the elites’ rule. This translation also makes <em>The Queen of France</em> available to scholars who are working on topics such as popular tales, on the prototypes of modern melodrama, or on depictions of animals in literature.</p>
## Further Reading 
<p>Jefferis, Sibylle. “Die Neuaufgefundene Heidelberger Handschrift von Schondochs ‘Königin von Frankreich und der Ungetreue Marschall’: Ihre Einordnung in die Übrige Handschriftenüberlieferung.” <em>New Texts, Methodologies, and Interpretations in Medieval German Literature</em> (Kalamazoo Papers 1992-1995), Kümmerle, 1999, pp. 209–27.</p> <ul> <li>Transmission history</li> </ul> <p dir="ltr" id="docs-internal-guid-a9a9cba3-7fff-cf22-ef17-335c652b5768">Jefferis, Sibylle. “Schondochs Märe ‘Die Königin von Frankreich und der Ungetreue Marschall’ im Vergleich mit dem ‘Sibillenroman’ von Elisabeth von Nassau-Saarbrücken.”<em> Text Analyses and Interpretations: In Memory of Joachim Bumke</em> (Kalamazoo Papers 2012-2013), Kümmerle, 2013, pp. 105-24.</p> <p>Jefferis, Sibylle. “The ‘Cronica von der Königin von Frankreich’: The Prose Adaptation of Schondoch’s Novella.” <em>Nu Lôn’ Ich Iu Der gâBe: Festschrift for Francis G. Gentry</em>, Kümmerle, 2003, pp. 159–72.</p> <ul> <li>Adaptations of the story</li> </ul> <p>Strippel, Jutta. <em>Schondochs 'Königin von Frankreich': Untersuchungen zur Handschriftlichen Überlieferung und Kritischer Text. </em>Kümmerle, 1978.</p> <ul> <li>Transmission history and historical-critical text edition</li> </ul> <p>Werner, Wilfried. <em>Cimelia Heidelbergensia: 30 Illustrierte Handschriften der Universitätsbibliothek Heidelberg.</em> Reichert, 1975.</p> <ul> <li>Manuscript version and its features</li> </ul>
## Credits
Transcribed by Jana Koepcke, 
Translation by Jana Koepcke, 
Encoded in TEI P5 XML by Danny Smith
## Suggested Citation
<p>Suggested citation: von Schondoch.  "The Queen of France." Translation and Introduction by Jana Koepcke. <em>Global Medieval Sourcebook</em>. <a href="http://sourcebook.stanford.edu/text/queen-france">http://sourcebook.stanford.edu/text/queen-france</a>. Retrieved on February 03, 2021.</p>